In addition to the complexity of
these series of transactions
that we've outlined,
another problem in
the payment system
is that there tends to be
a substantial cost burden
for merchants
at various points in
this transaction chain.
Let's go back to our initial
transaction for groceries
to try and understand the nature
of fees in this setting.
Remember that the cardholder,
the consumer here is buying a
$100 of groceries
from a merchant.
You would think and if
that transaction was
happening with cash,
that would mean that
the merchant gets a
$100 for a $100 of groceries.
In this setting though
that's not true,
the merchant agrees to accept
a sum less than a $100 for
that transaction
because it has to
pay a fee for processing.
It initially pays a fee to
its own bank if
the acquiring bank,
that's on the order of,
let's say, two and half percent.
This is known as a merchant
discount fee which is kind
of an ironic name given that
the merchant is
bearing this cost.
The acquiring bank then
pays the card network,
in this setting master card,
a small fee for processing
this transaction and
for providing
furnishing the funds
from the issuing bank
to the acquiring bank.
The issuing bank also
pays the card network a
small fee for completing
this transaction,
and the acquiring bank pays
the issuing bank directly in
the form of
an interchange fee for
this transaction being processed.
All in all, these fees can total
between one and three percent of
total transaction value
for merchants or at
least did historically in the US
before recent regulation
restricted the ability of
banks to levy debit
interchange fees on
merchants though credit
card interchange
has been left unregulated.
What's quite interesting is that
interchange fees tend to vary
depending on
the card network and the
kind of payment instrument
that's being used.
So historically,
debit interchange fees
tend to be lower than
credit card interchange fees with
pin debit having
the lowest processing costs.
Credit card fees
tend to be higher.
An American Express credit
card interchange fees
tend to be the highest,
because their business model
involves recruiting
customers who are
high value customers
from the perspective of
merchants, those who are wealthy,
those who transact frequently on
their cards and encouraging
these cardholders to use
their transaction instrument
through a series of
incredibly attractive
rewards even
relative to its card
network competitors.
It is striking that
in the United States,
merchants can pay let's say,
$3 of a $100 transaction in
the form of processing fees
to financial institutions
and card networks.
In response to these really
quite high fees that they
bear as we've discussed
often their second highest cost
of operating after labor,
many merchants respond
by simply saying they
won't accept certain
kinds of cards or
having a minimum required
amount before they're
willing to process a debit
or credit transaction.
The high cost associated with
payment processing suggests
an opportunity for
financial technology
companies that use
e-payment services to come
in and usefully disrupt
the industry and benefit
merchants by creating
a lower-cost processing system,
but also, consumers by
eliminating the inconvenience of
card minimums being required
in order to complete
transactions.
Some innovators in
this space include
large merchants like Starbucks.
Rather than having to
bear a processing fee
every time a consumer
goes and buys a latte,
what Starbucks has done
is essentially created
an app where consumers buy
a gift card let's say,
$50 or a $100 gift card
and keep that gift card
on their consumer wallet.
That means that Starbucks
now only has to pay
a processing fee every time you
reload or purchase
a new gift card,
rather than every time you
go and buy your latte.
Other innovators include Venmo,
which is a mobile app
that was first used
for sending cash
quickly to other users,
but is now used to pay merchants
without exorbitant
processing fees.
PayStand is an example of
a cloud-based billing and
payment platform that's trying
to improve payments
between businesses
and reduce these transaction
fees substantially.
The point that
the founder of PayStand,
Jeremy Almond makes sort
of quite profoundly,
is that in this movement toward
a cashless society that
seeks to more efficiently
allow consumers and merchants to
transact with payment instruments
like credit and debit cards,
it will be imperative to move
away from high processing fees
that tend to inhibit the growth
of these particular platforms.
This requires a substantial
investment in technology for
decentralized networks that will
allow merchants to
receive their funds,
but not require a substantial
penalty in the form of
a high processing fee for
these particular transactions.